Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So hello and welcome.
I call the August 22nd, 2023 City Council regular meeting to order.
City Clerk Ben Lane, please conduct the roll call.
Thank you, Mayor.
Mayor David Ortega.
Present.
Vice Mayor Kathy Littlefield.
Present.
City Council members Tammy Caputi.
Here.
Tom Durham.
Here.
Barry Graham.
Here.
Betty Jannick.
Here.
And Solange Whitehead.
Here.
City Manager Jim Thompson.
Here.
City Attorney Sherry Scott.
Here.
City Treasurer Sonia Andrews.
Here.
Acting City Auditor Leigh Clough.
Here.
And the Clerk is present.
Thank you, Mayor.
Excellent.
Tonight we have Sergeant Sean Ryan as well as Sergeant Eric Bowles and Firefighter Bobby
Kohnen, should anyone require assistance.
The area to my left is restricted.
The restrooms are available at that mezzanine through that exit passage.
Let's begin with the Pledge of Allegiance calling on Vice Mayor Kathy Littlefield.
I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America and to the republic for
which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
Well 32 years ago, Ukraine declared its independence.
Thirty-two years ago this week, the children born were the first free-born Ukrainians.
And today these 32-year-olds and their younger siblings are fighting for their freedom and
democracy against Russia.
So I'd ask that we call to mind their sacrifice and their fight for democracy.
Let's take this pause.
Thank you.
The annual conference for the League of Arizona Cities and Towns will have a conference in
Tucson next week.
And the City of Scottsdale, on behalf of you, we will be proposing a number of resolutions
for short-term rentals regarding limiting the number of STRs allowed, density and proximity
of rentals to each other.
So you will be seeing and hearing some news about that as we bring that forward as a combined
combining all cities together.
Secondly, I want to remind you that Scottsdale residents wanting to volunteer their time
and Institute Positive Change in Scottsdale are invited to apply to serve on city boards
and commissions.
Applications are now being accepted until August 31st for 10 boards and commissions.
Certainly you can just go to Scottsdaleaz.gov and search boards and commissions.
You'll also hear one round of nominations for boards in today's session.
So it is vital and we depend on volunteer participation to keep our city on a steady course.
For your information, during tonight's meeting, the Council may make a motion to recess into
Executive Session to obtain legal advice on any applicable item on the agenda.
If authorized by the Council, the Executive Session would be held immediately and would
not be open to the public.
The public meeting would resume following the Executive Session.
Also, as far as rules of conduct, per our Council rules, citizens attending City Council
meetings shall observe the same rules of order and decorum applicable to the members
of Council and City staff.
Unauthorized remarks or demonstrations from the audience such as applause, stamping of
feet, whistles, boos, yells and other demonstrations shall not be permitted.
Violation of these rules could result in removal from the meeting by security staff.
We do this in order to keep the meeting flowing so that we can take care of the people's business.
The next agendized item is for public comment.
Public comment is an opportunity for Scottsdale citizens, Scottsdale business owners or property
owners to comment on a non-agendized item that are within the Council's jurisdiction.
Request for or against a candidate or a ballot measure during the Council meeting is not
allowed pursuant to State law and is therefore deemed not to be within the Council's jurisdiction.
No official action can be taken on public comment items and the speakers are limited
to three minutes to address the Council.
If you wish to speak on a non-agendized item, you would just check with the Clerk.
In speaking with him, there is no request for public comment, therefore I will close public comment.
Next we have the review of our minutes.
I would ask for a motion to approve the special meeting minutes of July 10, 2023, executive
session minutes of July 10, 2023, regular meeting and work study session minutes of
July 10, 2023, special meeting minutes of July 11, 2023, executive session minutes of
July 11, 2023, and regular meeting minutes of July 11, 2023.
Do I have a motion?
So moved.
Thank you, Vice Mayor.
Second.
And a second from Councilman Durham.
Please record your vote.
Thank you, unanimous.
Next item on our agenda is consent agenda items.
Consent agenda items 1 through 15 have a full file on every matter and consist of agendized
items which might be pulled to a regular agenda, should anyone have a question.
And therefore, consent agenda items 1 through 15 are posted as moving forward.
If I see that Councilwoman may have a question.
And go ahead, Councilwoman.
Thank you, Mayor.
I just had a question on item 14.
Okay.
Can that be answered or would you like to ask it now?
Yeah.
It's easy.
Okay.
Please go ahead.
Okay.
I know it's to correct some changes in the numbers of the code, but you also removed
owners of vacation rentals or short-term rentals, shall have six months from the effective date,
et cetera.
Does that mean going forward that they don't have six months, that they need to be in compliance
much sooner than six months?
Yeah.
Brent, why don't you explain, describe the item and then answer.
Mayor Ortega, members of the Council, Councilwoman Janek.
So we're trying to do two things with this ordinance.
One we're correcting a link to another section of the code and that only needs to be done
because the separate code was amended after the vacation rentals code amendment.
The other thing that happened is the effective date of the vacation rentals code amendment
has already passed.
So we don't need the language giving people six months to comply anymore because everybody
has to comply as of May 23rd of 2023.
That's what we did there.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Appreciate that.
So clarifying, that was item number 14.
Councilmember Graham, did you have a question?
Mayor, no, I just wanted to pull a couple items from consent, if I may.
Okay.
Which would those be?
11 and 12, please.
And could you describe that?
Sure.
11 is the transfer for the NCAA Men's Final Four Tournament.
And 12 would be, I thought, very edifying for the public to learn about management of
the McDowell-Sinoran Preserve.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
So at this point, also we invite the public to comment on any of the consent agenda items.
And we see that there's no public comment on these items, therefore I will close public
comment.
So to clarify, we have remaining on consent agenda items one through 10, excluding 11
and 12.
Then we have consent agenda item 13, 14, and 15 remaining.
Do I have a motion on approval of consent agenda?
So moved.
Thank you.
Second.
We have a motion and a second.
Any further discussion?
Seeing none, please record your vote.
Thank you.
We are unanimous.
Moving on, we have created or will have a full presentation on item 11 and 12.
And call forward the, probably Karen Churchill or, excuse me, let's see who, oh great, Mr. Jemaine.
So regarding the Arizona major events host committee agreement request to adopt a resolution.
Thank you.
Please continue.
Yes.
Good afternoon, Mayor, Councilmembers, Steve Gigamo, Tourism and Events.
I have a presentation here to kind of go over the event funding request, hopefully answer
any questions you might have following.
I'd like to also say the Arizona major event host committee members are here as well to
address any questions you might have related to the activation or the agreement or the
funding process.
There we go.
As I mentioned, the Arizona major event host committee is requesting $432,000 in support
of the regionally hosted 2024 NCAA men's final four tournament.
The tournament is played on April 6th and 8th, 2024 in Glendale at State Farm Stadium.
I'd also like to mention on July 30th the Tourism Development Commission recommended
allocating $432,000 from the Tourism Development Fund 5% destination marketing allocation retained
by the city in support of that agreement.
Just a little bit of information.
You may recall in 2017 the region hosted the men's final four basketball tournament.
Back then the funding was requested by the host committee from many of the municipalities
regionally as well.
A little bit of different information regarding 27 investment economic impact to the region
itself.
I have a table here presenting, providing some of that information.
The investment by the city in 2017 was $150,000.
The estimate provided by the organizing committee was roughly $250,000 in realized value from
the deliverables and I'm going to talk a little bit about those deliverables here in just
a minute.
ASU did a study and found that the economic impact to the region was roughly $325 million.
Some more additional information on 2017, close to 60,000 visitors came for the final
four tournament.
The tournament had an average of four nights.
Spending average was about $490,000 per day.
The combined attendance for the tournament was $153,000.
At that time it was the second highest in NCAA history, 23 million viewers watched the
final four broadcasts.
This information is specific to Scottsdale, key performance indicators for the hotel properties.
This shows the increase in what we have related to the prior year to the 2017 year.
We had 85% occupancy over that period of time of the tournament, which was roughly about
a 9%, 10% growth.
Our average daily rate was 325, which was roughly about a 43% growth.
We did see that little incremental impact.
What's not on this slide is the year after we did additional analysis with these key
performance indicators, we did find that there was a decrease in those indicators I just
mentioned, kind of showing that bump related to the event itself, and that information
is in your report.
Some additional analysis, the host committee operating budget is $4 million.
They're requesting that from the Maricopa County cities, qualifying for Prop 302 funding.
They utilize the Prop 302 funding to identify the allocations that are requested from the
municipalities, whether it be the DMOs, in our case, the city itself.
So they utilize that to come up with a $432,000.
Additional information in this table shows the increase between 2016 and 2017 related
to tax collections, and in the lower right-hand corner you'll see $1.8 million was an additional
increase related to that period of time of those two months.
Now I'd like to spend a little time talking about the deliverables to Scottsdale in this
particular agreement that we're requesting approval here tonight.
The room nights, we're getting 4,000 Scottsdale room nights in the official block.
We originally started around 2,000, but we were able, through communication and working
on additional incentives, moving that up to 4,000 room nights.
Marketing inclusions are included, highlighting features within the travel information portion
of their website.
Community engagement may provide fan jam, truck mascots, cheerleaders, et cetera, if
available, select Scottsdale events, coordinate with Scottsdale to communicate to all schools
about unique REIT to the Final Four program.
In addition, business involvement, invite qualified Scottsdale businesses to apply for
the Business Connect program, and opportunity to highlight Scottsdale business participating
in the program.
Additional deliverables, event and planning, include familiarization tours ahead of the
Final Four, venues, host committee will encourage use of Scottsdale venues, businesses as sites
for the Final Four, hospitality invitations and ticket opportunities related to the 24
game, experience Scottsdale will closely partner with Scottsdale and host committee to leverage
the Final Four through in-kind marketing and promotion.
Some additional analysis, a bid tax investment of 432,000, coupled with the benefits, extensive
television coverage, national media exposure, it should provide substantial value, equal
value to the city regarding this particular funding request this afternoon.
Based on fiscal 2324, terms and development funds, sources and uses, projection funds
are available for that total payment of 432,000.
So the action here is outlined tonight, approved resolution number 12901, authorizing agreement
2023126.
For the funding, 432,000, the funding will be made in two payments this fiscal year,
260 in a piece in regards to the total, and that's coming from the 5% marketing allocation
retained by the city.
That concludes my presentation.
Any questions you might have?
Thank you, Steve.
Thank you.
Yes, ma'am.
Okay.
Councilmember Graham.
Sorry.
Thank you, Mayor.
Chief Shannon, thank you for the presentation.